# Hyacinth

Hyacinth is a collaborative data management and labeling tool for medical images.
The Hyacinth server provides a uniform and friendly interface for ingesting, transforming,
and labeling medical images in a collaborative environment.

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/48926197/215347637-5f84d38d-43ce-44f9-bafe-aa02922ab585.mp4

Here are some things you can do with Hyacinth:

* Manage large image datasets from a collaborative web app
* Create pipelines to transform data to different formats (e.g. convert DICOM images to Nifti volumes) via a friendly interface
* Create labeling jobs allowing multiple annotators to classify images based on provided criteria (pairwise comparison is also supported)

The Hyacinth web server can be run either on a local machine, or as a central
server for collaboration. Once the server is running, you can connect via any standard web
browser. Installation instructions can be found below.

## Installation

First, download a build of the Hyacinth server for your OS.

Builds are currently provided for the following operating systems:

* CentOS Stream 8

### Prerequisites

Hyacinth releases do not have any required dependencies, but there
are a couple of optional dependencies that are needed to use certain features.

If you want to use the built-in `slicer` driver, you will need a Python 3 installation.
If your OS does not come with Python 3 pre-installed, you can download an installer
from the [Python website](https://www.python.org/downloads/) or use your preferred package manager.

If you want to use the built-in `dicom_to_nifti` driver, you will need a dcm2niix installation.
See the [installation instructions](https://github.com/rordenlab/dcm2niix#install).

## Getting Started

The Hyacinth server is a packaged Elixir/Phoenix application, which can be started
via a script included with the release. However, before starting the server for the
first time, you need to create a database and add some data. The following steps will guide
you through this process.

1. Extract your downloaded Hyacinth release and cd inside:

    ```console
    $ tar -xf your-hyacinth-release.tar
    $ cd hyacinth
    ```

2. Hyacinth is configured using environment variables. While not strictly necessary,
it is convenient to save these to a config file. You can generate a default `config.env` file
using the included `generate_config` script. When you run `source config.env`, the variables
will be added to your environment for Hyacinth to use. If you do this in a subshell (e.g. `(source .env && ./bin/server)`),
the variables will be passed to the server without being added to your shell environment.

    Note that this command also generates a secure SECRET_KEY_BASE, which is used to encrypt user
    sessions. You should avoid changing this value as it will log out all users.

    ```console
    $ ./bin/generate_config
    $ mv bin/config.env .
    ```

3. The Hyacinth server uses two directories to manage data. The `warehouse` directory is used to
store files, and the `transform` directory is used as temporary space when running pipelines.
You can change the location of these directories via the `WAREHOUSE_PATH` and `TRANSFORM_PATH`
environment variables in your config.
To create these directories (matching the default config), run the following in your terminal:

    ```console
    $ mkdir -p ~/hyacinth/warehouse
    $ mkdir -p ~/hyacinth/transform
    ```

4. The Hyacinth server uses an SQLite database to store all application data. The location of the
database file can be configured via the `DATABASE_PATH` environment variable. To create the database, run the `migrate` script:

    ```console
    $ (source config.env && ./bin/migrate)
    ```

5. (Optional) Now that our database is ready, we can add some data. For this, we will use the `new_dataset`
script. Hyacinth currently supports `dicom`, `nifti`, and `png` datasets. The `new_dataset` script accepts
three arguments: the `name`, the `file type`, and the `path`.

    Assuming you have some Nifti files stored under `/path/to/niftis`, the following command would create a `nifti` dataset named `MyNiftiDataset`:

    ```console
    $ source config.env
    $ ./bin/new_dataset MyNiftiDataset nifti /path/to/niftis
    ```

6. Now we can start our server using the `server` script. To start the server, run the command below and then point your
web browser to `localhost:4000` (the default host/port) to verify everything is working.

    ```console
    $ (source config.env && ./bin/server)
    ```

### Example Config

This is an example of a default `config.env` file (as generated by the `generate_config` script - see above).

```bash
export DATABASE_PATH="~/hyacinth/hyacinth.db"
export WAREHOUSE_PATH="~/hyacinth/warehouse"
export TRANSFORM_PATH="~/hyacinth/transform"

export SECRET_KEY_BASE=[YOUR RANDOM SECRET KEY BASE HERE]
```

## Developer Installation

**These instructions are for software developers who wish to modify Hyacinth's code. For user
installation instructions, see above.**

### Prerequisites

Hyacinth is an Elixir/Phoenix application, and an Elixir installation is required for compilation.
See the [Elixir installation instructions](https://elixir-lang.org/install.html).

## Compilation

1. Clone the `hyacinth_server` repository and `cd` inside.

2. (Optional) If this is your first time using Elixir, you will need to install Hex and Rebar
(package managers for the Elixir and Erlang ecosystems, respectively) to build Hyacinth. Both
can be installed via the `mix` build tool included with Elixir.

    If you skip this step, you will be prompted to install both during step 3.

    ```console
    $ mix local.hex
    $ mix local.rebar
    ```

3. Install Hyacinth's dependencies from Hex (the Elixir package manager).

    ```console
    $ mix deps.get
    ```

4. Create the development database and run migrations.

    ```console
    $ mix ecto.create
    ```

5. Run the Phoenix server in development mode. Once the server is running,
you can connect via your web browser.

    ```console
    $ mix phx.server
    ```
